Thursday testing, testing, testing. Testing.
One, two, three. This is Thursday, January 10,
2002, in downtown Albuquerque, and I have the
pleasure and honor of interviewing Sam Camilli,
class of 73. To introduce yourself to any reader of
the transcript or any listener of the tape, tell
about yourself, background, growing up, what did
mom and dad do, where'd you go to high school, and so
forth. We're a fifth generation El Paso family. We
were born and raised there. I went to Austin High
School along with my four brothers. My father and
my grandfather were both in the wholesale food
business, and we basically grew out of that. My
older brother preceded me at A&M, of which I was
responsible for getting him there. I got there.
Basically, my best friend is a Malooly, and his
father Albert Malooly graduated in 52 and ever
since I was you know played baseball played
football and he wanted us to just go to A&M he
thought he was recruiting everybody for A&M and so
he recruited my brother and of course I wanted to go
first but Lou my brother got there before me so
that's really how I got there I almost didn't get in
I didn't have my application until May 31st when my
counselor said, you think you're going where? I
said, well, I'm going to go to A&M. I said, well, you
better get an application in because you won't get
there. And I said, well, Coach Chandler already
said I'm getting in, but I said, but I guess I better
get my application in. Had you visited College
Station and the campus before you went over to
enroll? Had you ever been there? Yeah, I went down
to see my brother play ball and went to the
architecture building. I wanted to be in
architecture, so. What was your impression when
you saw it, in fact? I loved it. I mean, my whole life
had been for, you know, 12 years of school was
basically getting to A&M. That's what I wanted to
do. So that's really when I got there, I fell in love
with it, you know. My brother loved it, had a good
job, you know, a good opportunity there and a good
school there. Now, your brother played? He played
baseball and he played pro baseball. He went three
years and then signed a pro contract. And was Tom
Chandler already there? Yes, he was our coach,
loved him. Good man, good. He was a great man, great
coach, great human being. I mean, just absolutely
wonderful. When you went over to enroll in the fall
of 69,
how did you get there and what did you take with you?
Describe the trip from El Paso to College Station.
Well, I always tell this story about my trip. When
my brother went to A&M, my parents got in the car,
loaded him up, took him down there in the car. Mom
made sure he had a place to sleep. And they were
there. I can't remember what hall they had. They
were torn down the hall. It was horrible. finish
Fowler Hall, which is where he stayed and I stayed,
but this place was really the pits. And of course my
mother saw it, she was all worried about him, you
know, she says, oh, he's not going to be happy here,
he's going to be, so they, I mean, she just, over and
over, both of them just made over, and Tom Chandler
said, they'll be fine, the dorm will be finished in
a month or so, and they'll be in the new, brand new
dorm. Well, when I went to A&M, my dad handed me a
plane ticket, I took two suitcases and he says,
have a good time in college, son. I don't have to
worry about you. So by, you know, the experience of
my brother and Coach Chandler basically saying,
hey, don't worry. Sam's going to be okay. We got him
a room. He's fine. He said, call Tom when you get,
Coach, when you get there. He'll come to the
airport, pick you up, take you to your dorm. Well,
that's what happened. I had two suitcases. I
called Coach Chandler. Coach Chandler showed up.
He picked me up. He says, is that all you had? That's
all I got? went to the dorms. Is that your room?
You're supposed to be here to register or get all
your stuff, but I'm taking care of it. If you have
any questions, call me. We'll see you later. So,
you know, here I am. I get there. I went in to the, you
know, the down below or the I can't remember what
they called it then, but got my keys, went up to the
room, got all set up. What dorm was it? Fowler Hall.
Fowler. And that was the athletic dorm. That was
basically where all the other jocks except the
football players. And they were still in
Henderson? They were still in Henderson. All
right. What did you, in those two suitcases, what
did you take? Actually, it was funny. I had all my
clothes in one and my stereo in the other. So I had to
have music. So I played in a band. I had a bunch of
musical background, so I made sure I had music. And
my roommate showed up, John Alvin Woods from
Nacogdoches, and he saw I had a stereo. He said, oh,
I'm so happy you brought your stereo. I said, yeah,
you don't know how much trouble it was to pack that
thing in that suitcase and make sure it got here
okay. Now, you flew El Paso to Houston. And a little
DC-3 from Houston to College Station. And Coach
Chandler came to meet you. Yes, he did. Did you have
a scholarship? No, I didn't have a scholarship,
but he made sure I had a room. And I was on the team,
and he got me a few books. He says, we can help you
with your books because that's something that
doesn't really take away. dollars from the
university but we can help you with bucks so did he
promise you the chance of a scholarship later
absolutely he knew my brother my brother was a full
full boat and he'd already he'd already uh gone
yeah he we're four years apart so he was basically
graduated when i got there and he uh he didn't he
signed his pro contract his third year so gave
coach another scholarship that fourth year um all
right um you you weren't in the core how Describe
how you became assimilated into Texas A&M student
body. When did that start? Oh, the day we went out
and started throwing washers out there in front. I
mean, that was just the, you know, you see these two
cans in the ground. Of course, in West Texas, we
don't know what washers are. And all of a sudden,
these baseball, well, the rest of the baseball
team showed up, you know. And my brother had a very,
um, Colorful reputation, shall I say? I'll give
you an example. We went first road trip with Coach
Chandler to, I can't remember if it was to Baylor or
somewhere, and we went to Luby's to eat, or first to
eat, it was Luby's, and he says, okay, everybody's
got a limit. Everybody, you just get whatever you
want to eat, except Camille. He's limited $10.
$10. My brother was known to eat for two or three
players. And of course, everybody had stories
about my brother. But when I got there, they all
wanted to see Camille's little brother, Dave
Elmendorf, and Long, and those guys. Who were the
big names on the baseball team when you arrived?
Well, Dave Elmendorf, Bob Long was still there.
Butch Gootsman was there. There was a Georgia
Englert I played with who went to the pros. And
several others. I'll remember their names
eventually here. Describe when you and your
roommate got your room set up. Describe what was in
the room and what it looked like. Literally
nothing. I mean, our stereo. Because he got to
bring more than I did. Whatever I had is what I had a
whole year. I mean, I didn't have a thing. And of
course, we eventually... You know, I eventually
went out and bought a refrigerator and hid it, and
we had a little bit of a toaster oven. And we hid it
because we weren't supposed to have anything in
there. How big was this refrigerator? It was a
little underneath. We put it underneath the
two-by-two, maybe the biggest, underneath the
sink. And we, both of us, liked to eat, as you can
tell. But we used to go out about once a week. drive
the rest of the dorm crazy and we'd get us a couple of
steaks at Safeway and we had a little uh for making
popcorn we had a hot pad and we brought up got some
oil and we cut up some french fries and we'd cook at
nine o'clock at night we start cooking those
steaks and we'd go to Cebisa the next morning and
eat breakfast and John and I used to love to do this
we'd walk around behind a bunch of people going to
eat breakfast or stand in line Man, I could have
sworn these people, they were in front of us
telling us, I could have sworn I smelled steaks
last night in the dorm. Somebody, I mean, we had
steaks going. Somebody had steaks going
somewhere. I was hungry all night. Well, we just,
you know, John, that was just our weekly ritual.
We'd go there. So that was one of the fun things we
did in the dorm that we were never supposed to do.
Right, let's go back to the very, very first. You
didn't go to fish camp? Didn't go to fish camp. I
don't know if there was fish camp in the city. Oh
yeah, there was. How did you register and how did
you select your courses? I went to a counselor. I
mean, I basically got there, they gave me the
packet, my registration packet down there, all
the athletes get it. So I got my packet, they told me
where to go, I went to a counselor, they basically
walked me through Saw what I was weak in, saw what I
was strong in, what my major was supposed to be. And
you were going to major in? Architecture. It was a
lifelong dream. So I got all registered and it
really was not, that was pretty easy for me. I mean
they did a real good job of getting me there. I was
there probably a week before, I was probably there
FOW week. when all the core guys were there. So none
of the athletes, nobody else had showed up. So I
walked campus. I walked to my classes. I made sure I
knew where this building was and that building
was. So I did all that at their behest. What
impression did the campus make on you, and what
made the most impression? Big. It was big. I mean, I
never realized. You know, Austin High School is a
big school for a high school. We had that quad, and
we had, you know, we had.
I did not remember it being that big when I went to
see my brother play. So it was very interesting to
see the size of it. Now what seemed new? Was there
anything that seemed real new? No, the
architecture building was brand new when my
brother was there. So, you know, we were real
fortunate. We got into a brand new building. And,
of course, you know, there was still a lot of
building going on. They were building the
oceanography building. They were building, you
know, all these things started really coming
alive during my four years there that I saw. In
fact, I worked on the oceanography building. Do
you remember who that counselor was that you? Not
at all. All right. Now, first classes. What were
some of those classes you remember the first year?
The first year was,
well, I flunked four of them, so I should tell you,
history and English were killers, especially
during baseball season. I ended up having to take
English in El Paso to make sure I got back to school
next fall. I took English 101 and History. Do you
remember any of the teachers that first year? You
know, every once in a while their names will flash
in front of me, and then somebody will tell me, did
you have Song Tso? You know, I said, you know, I did.
Of course, I had the judge, and I had my geology
prof. I can't remember his name. He was an older
prof, too, and he was funny. First thing in the day
in class, he says, how many athletes do we have in
here? Of course, half the, 90% of the class was
athletes trying to get their science. And he says,
okay, I just wanted to know that because I need to,
you know, gauge this class based on what you need to
know as opposed to what you, you know, will get you
by, so. As far as you and your buddies were aware,
were there any courses that were giveaways to
athletes in those days? We just knew if we took
geology, we could get some science credit. I took a
lot of Spanish. I was fluent in Spanish, so if I
needed an A, which I did several times, I went to
Spanish. And you were fluent in Spanish, not
because you'd taken a lot of Spanish, but because
you'd grown up in El Paso. Yeah, we really knew
Spanish before we knew English. My grandfather
was an assistant. And the Spanish prof there was
very thrilled to have me there because he was
trying to teach, you know, I was kind of his
teacher. Tell them what this means, and then help
them out so that they understand this stuff. Had
your older brother given you some advice on how to
succeed at A&M? No. He was a lot smarter than I was. I
mean, he was a math major and a psychology major, so
he really didn't struggle too much. But did he tell
you what to do or not to do? no of course he was off
playing baseball i really didn't see him much and
so he just you know he said how you like it i'm doing
good he says are you passing i said yeah i'm passing
he said that's all that matters as far as you recall
what did that first year cost do you remember any oh
we have all my old grade slips and i mean i i think it
was a thousand dollars the whole year for room
board tuition and everything and did you have any
spending money yeah my dad put money in the bank
which i went through remember how much He gave me
$500 one semester and $600 the next. As spending
money? As spending money. And that basically, you
know, I had to basically take care of everything,
which I thought was pretty good. And before you
left, perhaps related to that money, did your dad
give you any guidelines or rules?
No. I mean, I worked with my dad. for about seven
years. So he knew my money habits. I mean, he knew
how he paid me. He saw what I did with my money. What
did he do? He was in the wholesale food business.
Oh, yeah, that's right. I was a truck driver. I was
driving a truck delivering food since I was 15. And
he, you know, he resigned my paycheck every week.
And I think I was the only person that I never had one
vacation. I went to college for five years or four
and a half. And every vacation, I went home to work.
And my dad said, this is your trade-off. And every
summer I went back and worked for him. I didn't work
really in my field. And you assumed you were going
to graduate in what period of time? Well, I thought
it was five years. I guess one of my rudest
awakenings at A&M was I went to my first
architecture class, and Dean Romick was there.
And all the freshmen walked in, and he went up to the
podium. He says, y'all are here to be architects?
He says, yes. He says, well, I'm here to tell you
this is the wrong place to be. He says, you do not
need to be in the architecture profession. The
architecture profession is dead. Architects,
you know, are a dying breed. You're never going to
make any money. You're never going to be
successful. He says, you're going to be
frustrated your whole life. And he says, and
that's why we're changing this department. So all
of us are saying, wait a minute. We've got our
five-year plan here written down on our schedule
sheets. And you're telling us, you know, we've got
our book and everything else. He says, yeah,
you're going to be You are now going to be
considered ED students, which are environmental
design. We want you to learn design. We want you to
learn all these things that architects never
learn. They learn how to draw straight lines. We
want them to learn how to design first. We left. Of
course, we're all scratching our heads. About
half of the guys said, I'm out of here. I'm going to
go to UT or go to some other schools. So as, you know,
we were the guinea pig. I think our class was the
first ED class that graduated, and the goal was to
get us into graduate school. Well, that's real
good if, you know, and I was. I was accepted to
graduate school. I was planning on going to
graduate school. Unfortunately, I had a father
and a fiancé that both said I was having too much fun
in college. And one of them wanted to get married,
and one of them said, You're on your own, son. Your
younger brother now is in college. So it was one of
those things. And the degree is not, I'm not doing
what I really wanted to do, but it really helped me
focus on what I needed to do. My talent is in
construction, not in design. So that's really
where it led me, and that's what I'm doing. Now, in
those first months or that first year, was there
anyone in E.D. or architecture, whichever we
title it, was there anyone to whom you began to turn
for advice and direction? Not until my second
year. The first year was pretty much. Who was it
then, the second year? It was Larry Priesmeier. He
and I, you know, he was the first one that said, Sam,
you're not a designer. He says, you don't have you
know you're not an off the wall type guy you know
that these big firms he says you're he says you know
what you'd be great if i had a firm you're a nut bolt
guy you'd be drawing door jams your whole life
because you can do it you you know but give you
something real out you know something out there to
draw he says you'll you'll struggle for 20 years he
says you need to get and they didn't really have a
construction program at that time it was it was
just that was it so he says you need to concentrate
on these things So, you know,
he really kind of led me to get more into design
build where I could, you know, design metal
buildings and, you know, warehouses. And that's
really where Where he led me so you need to learn how
to build these things and you need to be a
contractor In that first year or two were there any
other? experiences you remember with somebody
that were important As you look back I I can't
remember the prof, but he was from Santa Fe, and he
spent a lot of, it was one of those things that he saw
the same thing in me that was in him. He was more of an
outdoor person and everything else. That's what
he told me. He says, you do not fit the mold of
somebody being in the office. He says, I've been in
the field for 8 or 9, 10 years. I can tell you right
now. He left the architecture field and went to
Santa Fe to live and work in the mountains and
everything else. He says, I can sense that you're
more of a hands-on guy. He said, you don't, you
know, you work with your hands, you do things with
your hands. Because I built great models. I was a
real good model builder. I could really do the
building part. Everybody wanted me as a partner so
that I could help them build stuff. They could
design it, I could build it. So as we teamed up on
teams, you know, I always got the three guys that
couldn't put a nail in a two-by-four to help, you
know, and I would go build a thing and they'd just
tell me what to build. So that's kind of how as we got
to that year, the third year earlier. All right,
back to the first year. During those first weeks,
months, how did you and your freshman buddies
learn about A&M traditions and all that? Most of
them, I should have been at an advantage with my
brother being there, but I was at a disadvantage in
that everybody there seemed to know what to do,
where to go, everything. So I followed. I did a lot
of following. you know, like most people, and
being from West Texas, way out there where I was, it
was strange because I caught, my wife still has
this in a letter, when there wasn't a football game
on a weekend, there was two people in the dorm, me
and somebody else on the back side, a swimmer from
somewhere that didn't have transportation, so
everybody else went home. You know, the campus was
basically evacuated except the people from
Mexico or, you know, the Far East or You know, so I
basically learned real quick, you know, you need
to make friends. If you don't want to spend every
weekend that there ain't a football game on this
campus. So I started making friends. I started,
you know, enjoying going back to the little city
down in Dallas and Waxahachie and places like that
to people's houses and coming back to A&M. And as
you make friends, you start making friends. Like
half of the friends that I met on the baseball team
all had friends in the Corps. Mm-hmm. So they're
all coming over here crying, you know, the blues,
you know, in their uniforms. They'd hide in our
dormitory room. You know, these guys, I mean, what
are you doing over here? I need to stay in here for
about four hours. Just leave me alone. I'm in
class. I'm in study hall. I'm doing something.
Just leave us alone. So they'd show up in the
uniforms, and pretty soon we had nine or ten or
twelve guys, you know, in the Corps over there
visiting us. So we'd start learning about the
Corps and, of course, how hard it was and, how lucky
we were that we weren't in the corps and those type
of things. But we didn't venture much to the quad. I
mean, as athletes, if you weren't in the corps, we
just didn't venture over there too much. Now you
all ate, you and your roommate ate at Sabeasa.
Describe the routine at Sabeasa for civilian
soldiers. Well, you walk in, drop your briefcase
or your books and get in line. For me, it was, you
know, strange to eat just at, you know, it wasn't
like high school where you all had your same
buddies. Every day was seeing it with somebody
different or saw somebody different. And it was
pretty much first come, first serve, you know,
very unregulated, regimented. I didn't like the
idea that you couldn't eat all day long, but, you
know, you had to get there in time. Did you think the
food was good? I thought the food was great. But any
food to me is great. Was there, among you non-Corps
members, was there mischief in the dining hall?
Oh, there's lots of butter patties on the ceiling.
We had a couple of pretty good food fights. Over
what? Somebody said, pass something. I can't
remember what it was. And you put out your hand, and
you got a, you know, You got a whole douse of sugar or
something in your hand and you throw it back and
pretty soon it just gets going back and forth.
Somebody will fling a butter patty at you across
the room and you try to figure out who it was. And how
many people maybe were involved in a food fight?
Well, eventually everybody, I think. And was
there any punishment? No, a lot of us had to clean up
stuff. Coach Chandler showed up one day and said, I
understand everybody had a good time last night at
supper. He says, we're going to clean up over
there. So, you know, it was the baseball players
against the swimmers and the track guys one time. I
know that. We all had supper, and basically
everybody was there at the bus. Did he say, it's not
going to happen again? No. He just said, you're
going to go clean it up. And he told them, he said,
you all don't touch that stuff. He says, I'm
sending some boys back over there. They're going
to clean up for you. So we got to clean up. All right.
What did you soon assume to be some guidelines for
you about going to class and behavior and dress and
homework and so forth?
My roommate wouldn't agree to it, but I learned
real quick you try to get as much done before you got
back to the dorm as possible. I did, where I went to
the library. Because once I got back to the dorm,
You know, studying was out the window, you know,
and everybody playing cards and playing baseball
games in the rooms and stuff like that. So if I
wanted, I lived in the architecture building. So
basically, I mean, I stayed there as long as I
possibly could because once I got back to my dorm
room, I never cracked a book. I mean, as an honest to
God, I never read a book. If I was going to read or
study, I'd go to the library. And this is the old
Cushing Library. This is the old Cushing Library.
I fell asleep many times in there. Did you ever know
of any mischief there? No. I never saw and I never
did any. Nobody else has either. I just don't, you
know, you just went there. Everybody was too busy
trying to get their studying done. I guess they
felt the same way once they got back to their dorm.
Give me a description of a typical class day. What
time did you get up? What did you do when? From
getting up to going to bed, describe a typical day.
Usually I always got an 8 o'clock class.
Architecture classes are four hours. So
baseball, we always had to have that class first in
the morning. So I'd get up, you know, John and I
would get up and go to breakfast, and I'd just take
off from there and go down to the architecture
building. I'd stay there for three hours. Then I
hit my next, you know, I had a class. I never had a, my
first freshman year, I never had an hour in between
classes because we had fall ball and we had to be out
there by 2 o'clock. So I had class 11, I had class 12,
I had class 1 by 2 o'clock. I was hooking it up to the
baseball field to get my cleats on and my stuff, get
ready to play ball, and we'd finish that up. And
when fall ball wasn't there, we just basically,
when we weren't playing baseball, we'd go back to
the dorm or go work out. We'd go back to the dorm and
have supper. Everybody walked to supper
together, and about 8 o'clock, we'd start
playing. I mean, guys would start playing cards
and At what time would y'all go to bed? Midnight.
11, 30, 12. Did you go to class every day? I mean, I
had class scheduled every day. I didn't make it
every day. Oh, you did cut some classes? Oh, yeah. I
was right on the ragged edge. My freshman year, I
was, you know, half the time I was Especially
English and history. Do you remember who you had
for history? I could probably look at my records,
but I don't remember who it was. Because I was still
teaching a big fresh 105 at 8 o'clock on Tuesday and
Thursday over in either in physics or in Zachary. I
might have had you. I was a horrible student. Did
you turn to anybody for academic advice during
that semester? Hey, what do I do? Well, Coach
Chandler got me help all the time. He knew all the
freshmen were struggling. He knew I was going to
struggle. He warned me. He says, it's almost
impossible for an architecture student to be an
athlete. He says, they demand more of your time to
be down there in the labs than we do. He says, they
want you there. learning, you know, everything.
So he said, you're going to struggle. And for two
years, I did struggle. And then I decided it was
enough baseball. It was either, you know, One time
I had to go, and it was obviously baseball. During
that first year, did you and your buddies go to Yale
practice? Oh, yeah, we had Yale practice right out
in front of our dorm. Okay. Several times. Okay.
So, yeah, we... What about midnight Yale
practice? Yes, we'd go to midnight Yale practice,
and we were known to dive off the three-meter,
three, is it the three-meter board? Mm-hmm. The
platform. Mm-hmm. It was condemned. That was one
of our, we'd go over there with the swimmers and
dive off that thing at 2 or 3 in the morning after
midnight. Campus police come screaming down
there, what are y'all, you guys, that thing is
condemned, it's going to fall down. And what would
y'all be wearing when you did that? Our clothes,
full clothes, whatever we had on at the time. They
just come by, hey, we're going to go die. You guys
want to come? All right, now that sounds like that
might have been physically dangerous. Looking
back on it, did you all do any other pranks that you
now realize were dangerous?
Oh, I wouldn't call it dangerous, but I think we had
a band my second year over there. Baseball players
had a Charlie Jenkins was a drummer. Had another
guy down the road play saxophone, I played guitar,
and we got a couple of core guys for the band that
wanted to play, and we started playing one night.
It was 11, 11 o'clock, 12 o'clock, we're out on the
stoop, you know, we're just rocking along, just
had everybody downstairs below just having a good
old time. All of a sudden, one guy stopped playing,
the other guy stopped playing, and Because half us
are in the room, half us are out of the room. We're
trying to figure out how all these people are kind
of moving down the stoop. And in comes Gene
Stallings. And he says, boys, you sound great. He
says, I love the music. I said, but I got some
players across the way that need to get their sleep
because they're going to play a football game on
Saturday. He says, I don't want you to stop ever
playing the music. I just want you to stop tonight.
So he walked, you know, and everybody, you know,
we're just all shaking in our boots. Chandler's
going to hear about it now. And, you know, of
course, Tom had it. I said, I heard you guys were
serenading the football players the other night,
boys. He said, we're not going to have that again. I
said, we'll stop early, Coach. We'll stop early.
So that was not a, it was a very threatening thing
because Gene was a man of very few words. And all he
had to do, and everybody was starting to pack up
their stuff. We knew we had done something wrong,
so we just started putting our stuff away. We had a
little contest one year, and these were the older
baseball players when I was there. The football
players would get on top of Henderson on the roof.
And we'd get on top of Fowler on the roof with our
golf clubs and our golf balls. Yeah, we'd have
little... I wouldn't say mortar launches.